# WCCI 2026 Tutorial: Did something just break? - A Stream-Learning View on System Monitoring and Explainability

Monitoring systems, which rapidly analyze live data to detect and describe anomalies and failures, enable operators to make informed decisions. Efficiently capturing complex, multi-feature interactions in real time, the need for such systems spans domains, ranging from industrial control and critical infrastructure to cloud services. 

In this tutorial, we approach monitoring tasks from the perspective of data streams and concept drift: We first cover the automatic detection of anomalous behaviour by drift detection mechanisms. Afterward, we focus on a more detailed analysis of anomalies by applying drift localization and explanation techniques. Here, the ultimate goal is a machine-assisted identification of potential root causes. In this tutorial, we cover both practical algorithms and theoretical aspects. This allows for an in-depth analysis of proposed methods and serves as a conceptually sound bridge connecting drift detection, explainable AI, and causal analysis. Throughout the tutorial, we demonstrate an end-to-end workflow for critical infrastructure consisting of the discussed methodologies.

\paragraph{Learning Objectives}
Participants will get an overview of how to attempt monitoring tasks in evolving environments with methodologies from stream learning and drift analysis tools. Next to learning about practical tools for supervised as well as unsupervised drift detection and drift explanation, the tutorial covers the solid theoretical background of drift and delves into theoretical arguments on which methodologies to use for monitoring purposes. Thus, in the end, participants will be equipped with the theoretical background to choose suitable methods and knowledge on the practical applications of different algorithms in the streaming setup, as well as gaining an overview on some of state-of-the-art algorithms and methods to explore and attempt practical challenges head-on.
